import BlogPost from 'components/layouts/blog/Blog'

export const meta = {
    title: 'Satisficery Engineering',
    category: 'culture',
    description: 'Sometimes teams need a little push in the right direction. Sometimes teams to be given space to find their own way. He are some brief notes on how I traverse this issue.',
    date: '2017-08-04',
    image: 'content.webp',
    author: {
        name: 'Paul Adams',
        avatar: 'paul.png',
        twitter: '@therealpadams'
    },
    readTime: 2
}

export default ({ children }) => <BlogPost meta={meta}>{children}</BlogPost>

There is a particular dark art within engineering leadership. Nobody
ever really teaches it; at least nobody ever taught it to me. And even
when you think you've learned this dark art, there is always more to
learn. Because the lessons learned in the context of one team almost
never apply in the context of a different team.

The dark art? Push.

## Introducing Push

Engineering leadership is all about help. "How can I help my teams
achieve what they need/want to achieve?" This help can come in all
sorts of shapes and sizes. The amount of effort that goes into helping
those goals needs to be balanced with results being achieved. This
balance between effort and results is what I call "Push".

![Push Axes](effort-vs-results.png)

Push is a good thing. By keeping Push in mind, engineering leaders are
helping to ensure that their engineers are satisfied, productive and
generally happy in their work.

### Look To The Corners

Whenever I see some kind of cartesian space like this my instinct is
to wonder, "what is happening in the corners?" In the case of Push, I
think there is a risk of seeing some of these corners as highly
desirable.

Lots of effort, lots of results! Great, right?

![Push Axes (Enhanced)](effort-vs-results-corners.png)

Let's look at the corners one-by-one:

- Low Effort, Low Results Achievement

If the team is not putting in a lot of effort and is not focused on
delivering results, they won't deliver results. Simple as that. At
least no deliver anything that gives a sense of satisfaction in the
work.

- Low Effort, High Results Achievement

Getting results! Great! Right? If the team is not being challenged in
its work, we risk boredom and all the bad "things" that come with
it. Like corner cutting.

- High Effort, Low Results Achievement

Putting in lots of effort and obtaining no tangible results is
probably the most-obviously "bad" corner. It is bad for both the
organisation and the team.

- High Effort, High Results Achievement

This is the corner that many engineering leads get tricked into
thinking is A Good Thing&trade;. There is a time and a place for
stretch goals, but have you considered the impact they have on the
team?

## Too Much Of A Good Thing

So having looked at the corners, we should probably take a look at the
dimensions themselves: results (achievement) and effort. For each of
these dimenions there are some clear downsides to being too far
up/down the scale:

![Push Axis (Super-enhanced)](effort-vs-results-sides.png)

- Too Much Effort

Regardless of results, always aiming to get as much effort from the
team as possible is not advisable. Sustained effort makes people
mentally and physically tired. After a while, this is guaranteed to
have a detrimental affect on results achievement and can lead to
burn-out.

- Too Little Effort

Consistently requiring little effort can have a multitude of affects
but, in general, it breeds laziness and/or boredom.

- Too Much Results Achievement

It's OK to fail. We all do it all the time. If all of your projects
are running perfectly all the time, teams can get complacent and corners
can get cut. By introducing learning opportunities into work we open
ourselves up to a little risk of failure, but the trade-off is a
even-more-skilled workforce.

- Too Little Results Achievement

This one is actually more common than you might think. How often have
you worked with a team that asked "Why are we doing this?" Knowing why
you're working on something is a crucial factor in success. In the
most extreme case, when projects fail regularly (systematically?) your
teams will just get demotivated.

## What Does It Mean To Satisfice?

Satisfice is an excellent portmanteaux taught to me during my PhD. It
is a blend of "Satisfy" and "Sufficient":

- Satisfy: to meet expectations
- Sufficient: to do/be enough, adequate

At the heart of "Push" there is this desirable space I call
"Satisfice". It is the sweet spot where we focus the engineers on
achievement, but without over-excursion. Sometimes we might want to
deliberately lower the focus on effort!

![Push Axis (Final)](satisfice.png)

The trick with Satisfice is understanding how to walk about this sweet
spot.

Through your interactions with your team members (1-on-1s,
retrospectives etc) you get a sense of the health of the team. Teams
that are "forming" or "storming" should not really be pushed up the
"effort" dimension. If you *have* pushed a team up the "effort" scale
(e.g. looming deadline). you might want to give them a break in the
future.

Similarly, there are times to focus on results attainment: got a high
business value project you are working on? When that project is over,
you might want to load the team with more-flexible targets to leave
them with headspace for personal development.

### How To Push?

Ultimately the trick is to be mindful of the needs of both
organisation and the team. Your best opportunity to apply Push is in
planning sessions:

- Does the organisation need specific results to a deadline? Push up
  effort and results orientation.
- Need the team to learn some new skills? Push up effort and lower
  results orientation.

You get the picture.

Ultimately, use your senses. Use your gut feeling. Push is not
something to measure formally or enact explicitly. Just be mindful of
it.

This *does* mean we need to be careful with regards to any metrics you
might be gathering. Most performance metrics assume that Push is in a
fairly stable position on the Satisficery cartesian space. Certain
changes to Push are guaranteed to affect certain metrics. So you need
to take this into account. Don't let the numbers win! Gathering
metrics is great (and important) but applying Push is about optimising
the team *for now* not for some desired trend.

## Getting Pushy and Satisficey

I'd say "try this out", but you already are, probably. Keep doing
it. Keep being in-tune with the needs of your team. Keep reacting to
those needs. Keep being in-tune with the needs of the
organisation. Keep reacting to those needs, too.

Use Push to gently move your team around the Satisfice space and
everyone wins.