import Page from 'components/Page'

export const meta = {
    title: "Rush Hour Berlin",
    description: 'A Public Transport Survival Guide',
    date: '2016-03-19',
    image: 'train.jpg',
    author: {
        name: 'Paul Adams',
        avatar: 'paul.png',
        twitter: '@therealpadams'
    }
}

export default ({ children }) => <Page meta={meta}>{children}</Page>

Berliners love to complain about the public transport; it's in their
blood. Within the city there are two major players: the BVG, who
operates the buses, trams and UBahn; [Deutsche
Bahn](http://www.s-bahn-berlin.de/en), who operates the SBahn. The
advice I am dropping here is, I hope, an invaluable survival guide.

## Waiting

You can always tell the most experienced users of public transport
because they strategically place themselves in the correct position to
get straight onto the vehicle they are waiting for. When the vehicle
arrives don't make too much effort to get out of the way of people
getting off. Bonus points for standing front-and-centre of the door
and blocking their way. If you see some idiots actually waiting at the
side to let people off, don't wait or them. Ultra-bonus points can be
earned for barging straight past them as soon as you can, more if
people are still trying to get off.

## Getting On

Now this is most important. Simply getting onto the public transport
is so easy to get wrong. As you board your tram/train/whatever you
should look around to see if there is some space for you to stand or
sit in. Then (and this is most important) just stand there. Don't
bother to move. Simply huddle by the door with all the other
commuters. You get bonus points for blatantly ignoring space further
into the vehicle and ultra-bonus points for blocking the entrance of
another passenger behind you, who is also trying to get on.

### Getting Off

It is rush hour so, inevitably, you vehicle is going to be busy. Don't
let that bother you. When you arrive at your exit there is a simple
procedure for disembarking. Firstly, don't bother to wait. What a
complete waste of your time that is! Instead, start pushing your way
to the front immediately. Don't bother to check if the person in front
is also trying to get off. If someone is blocking your way, first you
should check to see if they are even capable of moving for you. Yes?
No? It does not really matter, squeeze past them and squash them into
a uncomfortable position regardless.

## Payment

This is one aspect of the public transport that most people fail to
understand at first. In theory, you are supposed to pay. Many people
actually get annual passes from their work or school. If you're one of
the other folk that are supposed to pay, don't bother. Occasionally
you might encounter someone with an ID and a
[tricorder](https://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/Tricorder) who grunts at
you. They probably want to see the ticket you do not have. No
problem. Assume your finest non-German accent and in your native
tongue (the further away from German, the better) say "Good morrow,
sir. By happenstance I have just had my pocketbook purloined. Can you
assist me with directions to the constabulary?"

## Tarif Zones

Super-simple. Berlin basically only has two zones: Zones A + B and
(confusingly) Zone C. Almost any ticket covers you for both Zones A +
B. Zone C is special. Why? Because it is home to Sch√∂nefeld Airport
and the mythical Berlin Brandenburg Airport. Both are side-by-side and
are at the first stop in Zone C. That's right, you need the extra
expensive ticket to go one stop when arriving/departing to the
airport. Because: fuck you tourists. If you already have a valid
ticket for Zones A + B (Why? Did you not read the previous section of
this blog post?) then all you need is to buy an
Anschlussfahrausweis. In the one stop between the airport and the
freedom of Zones A + B you are almost guaranteed to have this magical
little ticket checked. The correct procedure is to insert the ticket
into the mouth of the person with the tricorder.