import BlogPost from 'components/BlogPost'

export const meta = {
    title: 'Evaluating My Strengths',
    category: 'culture',
    description: 'As part of a leadership team exercise, I followed the Clifton StrengsFinder assessment to find out more about where my skills lie as a lead.',
    date: '2018-01-29',
    image: 'strength.jpg',
    author: {
        name: 'Paul Adams',
        avatar: 'paul.png',
        twitter: '@therealpadams'
    },
    readTime: 2
}

export default ({ children }) => <BlogPost meta={meta}>{children}</BlogPost>

It's very satisfying being a member of the leadership team inside
Zalando Search. As a group, the other leads have been very welcoming
to me over the last 6 months and we have grown to become a genuine
team. Work in progress, but a team nonetheless. Recently, the
bossman figured we were overdue for a team offsite to help solidify
our team and to set out our plans for the coming year.

As part of this meeting we all conducted the [Gallup Strengthsfinder](https://www.gallupstrengthscenter.com)
2.0[^1] exercise and presented our results to each other. Both for us
as individuals and for us as a team, this provide to be a very
illuminating exercise.

In this blog post I wanted to share with you all my personal results
and what they means for the people who work with me.

## Strengthsfinder 2.0

I should probably start with the assessment exercise. It is important
to start here because the test is build upon a premise that you're
probably not going to like:

> You **cannot** be anything you want to be -- but you can be a lot more
> of who you already are.

Yeaaaah... if you were brought up to believe you can be whoever you
want in life, this exercise is probably not for you.

The exercise is based upon the research of Don Clifton. Don's concern
was that we often spend too much effort in identifying and improving
our weaknesses. As a result, our natural abilities run the risk of
being completely untapped. In the worst case scenario this can lead us
to become deeply frustrated in our work, without ever really
understanding why.

Clifton's model identifies 34 skill areas and, by taking the
assessment your top 5 skill areas are identified. The argument is that
the effort spent on developing your natural talents will produce
significantly higher returns then putting the same effort in
developing skills that you do not naturally have.

The test itself is a simple series of questions for which you have 20
seconds per question. I cannot remmeber how many questions I answered,
but the overall test lasted about 30 minutes. Each question presents a
scale between two positions and I had to select where on that scale I
felt I belonged. Often the opposite ends of the scale were not polar
opposites. In fact they could be completely different concepts and I
had to choose which I felt applied more to me: "I am satisfied when I
help a teammate solve a problem... ...I enjoy eating food I have
cooked myself."

## My Strengths

Having taken the test, you are provided a report which explains your
top 5 strengths. These are the skills into which you really should
focus your development time. For me, in order, these are:

- Harmony
- Concistency
- Includer
- Arranger
- Responsibility

Having read my reports to understand these skills better, I was
pleasantly surprised at how insightful the test had been. Synically, I
had assumed the whole test was going to be nonsense and, at best "a
bit of fun"[^2].

Here's a quick overview of what these different skills mean; I am
paraphrasing from the report for the sake of brevity. There are listed
here in order from the strongest. Don't forget: these are *all* my
strongest skills out of a set of 34.

### Harmony

I focus on building concensus within my teams. Differing opinions are
inevitable and help to produce great solutions to problems, but I
prefer to focus on the common ground and not on the diaspora of
opinions. I like to structure conversations this manner to avoid
arguments, which are outright counter-productive.

### Concistency

I treat all my team members equally and have a set of rules/standards
that I apply uniformly across their work and my own. Junior engineers
bring just as much to the table as a senior engineer, just they are
just bringing something different. We all have our roles to play and I
work hard to ensure that everyone in my teams is equally enabled to
play their role.

### Includer

This is subtely different from the "concistency" skill. As an
"Includer" I am always working hard to ensure that everyone in my
teams is engaged. That they are all part of the solution, no matter
what the problem. I shy away from exlcusivity and, instead, try to
create a wide and encompassing team where everyone is welcome.

### Arranger

As an "Arranger", I like to tackle large and difficult problems and I
enjoy breaking them down into smaller parts and arranging those parts
into an efficient solution. I suspect this is a common skill within
all agile leaders: we jump on complex problems and try to make them as
simple as possible.

### Responsibility

I form a strong psychological bond with my work, making me feel
emotionally attached to idea of seeing the work through to
completion. I thrive on volunteering for more responsibility than I
currently have, stetching to achieve more.

## On Reflection

So these results ended up being impressively insightful. When I first
read the results, they instinctively felt "correct" but were not all
necesarilly skills I would have identified for myself.

"Concistency" is a good example of this. I recently recorded a podcast
with Jen Bunky and Lauri Apple where I was asked about my
leadership. I cited having a strong consistent set of expectations
within the team as being super-important to my success. I had no idea
at the time that this was a "skill" and one that I should even focus
more on.

For me, knowing the set of skills that I am best at is not the crucial
learning from this exercise. I already had a pretty good (although not
complete) understanding of what I am good at. My key learning is a
shift in perspective; the learning that there is a lot to be gained
from developing skills that I already have, rather than focusing on my
weaknesses.

I highly recommend the "Strengthsfinder 2.0" book. It is a quick read,
clearly written and provides the reader with access to Gallup's online
testing tool. Moreover (and more valuably) the book provides tangible
examples of ho to develop each of the 34 skill areas. After all,
identifying strengths/weaknesses is only the *start* of our
professional development.

[^1]: Yup, it's still cool to slap a "2.0" on things, folks!
[^2]: For some definition of "fun".